# Learn-Git

## Configuring Git

We can configure git in three levels. At the very top we have system level the settings that we have here are applied to all users of the current computer.

* User - applys to all users of the current computer
* Global - applys to all repositiries of the current user
* Local - applys to the current repository or the repository in the current folder.

So we can have different settings for different repositories or different projects.

```console
git config --global -e
```
All this configuration settings are stored in a text file .gitconfig. This command will open the configuration file in our default editor.

## Creating Snapshots

### Initializing a Repository

```console
git init
```
This command is used to initialize a new empty git repository in our project directory.

### Git Workflow

Our git repository is actually a hidden sub directory in our project directory. Creating a commit is like taking a snapshot of our project.  
In git we have a intermediate step or area called staging area or index. It's essentially what we are proposing for the next commit or next snapshot.  
We add the modified files to the staging area or index, review our changes and if everything is fine then we'll make a commit.  
The proposed snapshot will get permanently stored in our repository. Each commit clearly explains the state of the project at that point in time.  
Staging area is either a reflection of what we currently have in production or the next version that's gonna go into production.  
Each commit contains a unique id which is generated by itself and details of who, when and why the changes were made.  
In terms of storage git compresses content and doesn't store duplicate content.

### Committing changes

```console
git commit -m "Initial Commit."
```
Here within the quotes we type a short description to identify what this snapshot represents. At times a short one liner description is not sufficient.
In situation like this we drop the message and we just type 

```console
git commit
```
This opens our default code editor with COMMIT_EDITMSG tab open which is stored in our git repository.  
We add a short description and after a line break we type a long description. When we save the changes and close the window our changes will be committed.

### Skipping the Staging Area

```console
git commit -am "Learn how to commit without staging the changes."
```

By supplying the options flag -a which means all modified files will be committed direct without staging them.

### Removing Files

```console
git ls-files
```

When we remove a file from our working directory it still exists in the staging area. This command displays the files in our staging area.  
To remove a file we have to remove it from both the working directory and as well as from the staging area.

```console
git rm file2.txt
```

This command removes the file from both the working directory and the staging area in one go.

### Renaming or Moving Files

We use standard unix mv command to rename or move files and directories. In git renaming or moving files are two step operation.  
First we have to modify our working directory and we have to stage two types of changes, an addition and deletion. 

```
git mv file.txt main.js
```

This command will apply the changes to both the working directory and the staging area. 

### Ignoring files

To prevent git from adding certain files to the repository we use a special file .gitignore.  
This file don't have a name and should be placed in the root of the project directory.
It only works if we add the files to the .gitignore before committing the changes.  
It doesn't work and git keeps tracking the changes even if we add the file or directory to the .gitignore. To remove the files from staging area  

```console
git rm --cached -r bin/
```
We use git rm command to remove files from both the working directory and as well as from the staging area.  
By using --cached flag git removes the files only from the staging area.

### Short Status

```console
git status -s
MM file1.js
?? file2.js
```
Using this command we can get a shorthand status output. We have two columns. The one in the left represents the staging area and the other represents the working directory.

### Viewing Staged and Unstaged changes

To view the exact lines of code that has been changed we use the diff command. 

```console
git diff --staged
git diff
```

By providing the staged option git compares the files in the staging area with the files in the previous commit.  
This shows what we have in the staging area that goes into the next commit.  
Without the staged option it compares the files in the working directory with the files in the staging area.

```console
git diff --staged
diff --git a/file1.js b/file1.js
index badfb70..47c3216 100644
--- a/file1.js
+++ b/file1.js
@@ -1,3 +1,5 @@
 hello
 world
 test
+sky
+ocean
diff --git a/file2.js b/file2.js
new file mode 100644
index 0000000..f5e95e7
--- /dev/null
+++ b/file2.js
@@ -0,0 +1 @@
+sky
```

a/file1.js is the older copy which we have in the last commit. b/file1.js is the newer copy in our staging area. We compare two copies of the same file.   
Git divide the file into chunks, every chunck has a header that has information which gives you context in this case @@ -1,3 +1,5 @@.  

If we run git diff without any arguments we can see unstaged changes and if we pass --staged we can see the staged changes that are gonna go into next commit.

### Viewing history

```console
git log

commit 6c950910ae7a3f3d258d34e7d8610785c08f2e99 (HEAD -> master)
Author: Guru Prakash Ram <69163711+guru-apr21@users.noreply.github.com>
Date:   Sat Dec 26 12:26:07 2020 +0530

    Remove the bin directory from staging area which is accidentally committed.
```

This command prints the commit history sorted from the latest to earliest. Git automatically generates a unique 40 characters hexadecimal string.

```console
git log --reverse --oneline

b0c4389 Initial commit.
22a51dd Learn how to commit without staging the changes.
5069f0c Remove unused code.
```
This command shows us the short summary of the commits. The unique identifier is shortened to 7 characters. The reverse option sort commit from earliest to latest.

### Viewing a Commit

```console
git show 6c95091
```
We use git show command to see what exactly we have changed in a commit. There are two ways to reference a commit. We can reference a commit using its unique identifier.  
We don't have to type all the seven characters, we can type fewer characters as long as there is no other commit whose id starts with these characters.  

```console
git show HEAD~1
```
Another way is to use the HEAD pointer. To view the last commit we can type HEAD or to look at the previous commit we type ~ and specify how many steps we want to go back.  

```console
git show HEAD~1:.gitignore
```
This command shows us the exact version stored in this commit. We specify the complete path of the file after the semicolon.

```console
git ls-tree HEAD~1
```
A commit is a complete snapshot of our project. To view all the files and folders in a commit we use git ls-tree command followed by the commit we are interested in.  
A unique identifier is generated based on the content of the file. In git database we have a object with this id.  
Files are represented using blobs and directories are represented using trees.

```console
git show 51912609ec2
```
We can view the content of this object using the git show command followed by the id of the object. So using the show command we can view a object in the git's database.  
These objects can be 
 * Commits
 * Blobs(Files)
 * Trees(Directories)
 * Tags

### Unstaging files

```console
git restore --staged file2.js
```

To undo git add operation we use git restore command with --staged option. To restore files in the staging area we use --staged option followed by the file name.  
This command makes sure that we don't have any changes in the staging area, all the changes will be in the working directory.  
The restore command essentially take copies from the next environment. In case of the staging environment the next environment is the last commit.  
If we don't have the copy of the file in our repository or in the last commit, git is gonna remove this file from the staging area and take it back to its previous state.

### Discarding local changes

```console
git restore .
```

We can discard the local changes using the restore command.  
When we execute this command git is going to take the version of the file in the next environment in this case the staging environment.  
We cannot discard local changes in untracked files because git hasn't been tracking this and git doesn't know where to get the previous version of this file.  

```console
git clean -fd
``` 
We use git clean to remove all untracked files.

### Restoring a file to an earlier version

```console
git restore --source=HEAD~1 file1.js
```

There are two options we can undo or revert the last commit or we can restore a file to its previous version.  
By default git will restore the file from next environment or next area.  
In this case we want to change the default behaviour and restore the file from the commit before the last one.

## Branching

Branching allows us to diverse from the main land of work and work on something else in isolation.  
A branch in git is a pointer to a commit. The master branch is a pointer to the last commit in the main line of work.  
As we make new commits git moves the pointer forward automatically. So it knows what is the latest code in the main line of work i.e, the snapshot stored in this commit. When we create a new branch git creates a new pointer that can be moved around.  
This pointer is just a tiny file that contains a 40 byte commit id. When we switch to the new branch and make new commits git moves the pointer forward. The master pointer stays where it is. So git knows latest code in each branch.  
When we move to master git takes the snapshot of the commit that master points to and reset our working directory to that snapshot. We always have single working directory. Using a special pointer called HEAD git knows which branch we are currently working on.  
This pointer is also another tiny file that contains the name of the branch like master.  
When we switch to different branch git moves the HEAD pointer and updates the tiny file and writes the name of the target branch.
